# MNIST Handwritten digitclassifier

About Project: The task is to recognize handwritten digits. In this project user can draw some number on the screen and a neural network will try to predict which number it is. The program tries to recognise the digit drawn and highlight the number which best fits the description.
Implementation: The project is implemented using java language using NetBeans as IDE. This project consists of several libraries defined by us for better visibility and to give structure to our program. Several abstract classes were created to implement various functionalities required for deep-Learning neural network. Following are the libraries and the classes contained in them with a brief description about them:
1.	LIB.mathlib.DS: This library contains matrix and vector definition which are required data structures. 
a.	Matrix: Representation of a real matrix with customizable size.
b.	Vector: Representation of a real vector with customizable size.
2.	LIB.mllib.net: This library contains definition of Neural Network with a utility function.
a.	NN: Representing a neural network. Every network consists of different layers and performs mathematical operations on them. This network can be trained so that a specific input results in a desired output. This class NN contains various constructors for initialising neural networks.
i.	Feedforward (Matrix in): Feedforward the input values organized in a matrix through the network. The neuron values and activations are saved for later use.
ii.	Backpropagation (…): Backpropagates an error through the network and updates error matrices. This function takes input data, output data, error matrix, bias error, and cost function.
b.	Util: A helper class for dealing with training and test data of the neural network.
i.	Batchformation (): Divides the given array into parts of specified batch size. The last part could be shorter if size of array is indivisible.
ii.	Randomshuffle (): Shuffles the two arrays randomly. Every swap is executed on both arrays so that the order stays comparable.
3.	LIB.mlib.options : This library contains several other libraries which are utilised for initialisation or normalisation of data.
a.	Activation: This library contains definition of activation function. An abstract class is created so as to maintain regularity between all activation functions being defined.
b.	Cost: This library contains definition of cost function. An abstract class is created so as to maintain regularity between all cost functions being defined. For simplicity only quadratic cost function is defined.
c.	Initialisation: This library contains definition of initialisation function. An abstract class is created so as to maintain regularity between all initialisation functions being defined.
d.	Regularisation: This library contains definition of regularisation function. Regularization is a technique for penalizing large coefficients in order to avoid overfitting.
4.	LIB.mllib.trainer: Here we define a stochastic gradient descent trainer. This trainer trains data batch wise and backpropagate when training of one batch is done. This takes neural network definition and call appropriate functions to train NN.
5.	LIB.mltest.main: This is main library which contains all of the UI which was done using NetBeans inbuilt features. The file Frame.java contains main method. Most of the UI was done with help of NetBeans documentation and some tutorials from google. There are different handler classes defined in this library which handle particular aspect of UI for e.g. Mouse_handler.java handles functions of mouse such as clicking, drawing, etc.
How to use: This program is implemented on netbeans so this will run smoothly on netbeans platform. One should load this program into platform and hit run program. After hitting run program, a popup window will ask for number of neurons in hidden layers. One can enter “10 10 10” this means there are 3 hidden layers with 10 neurons each. Then it will ask for another user input where it will present the user with option to choose which activation function to implement. After selecting this, A big frame will appear where 3 buttons will be present namely Train, Test and Predict. One must first train the model for better output. The training phase may show some errors like “OutOfMemoryError: java heap space”, but this is not an error of program but of low memory of netbeans java heap. To rectify it, keep on clicking Train button, after few attempts it will run properly and will show accuracy of each epoch. After training click on test and wait until finished is printed on output tab of netbeans. Then try drawing digits with mouse and then click on predict. The most probable outcome will be highlighted in red.
